*
THE OCEAN IS
DYNAMIC, IT'S MOVING...
OVER 70% OF THE
SURFACE OF THE PLANET
IS COVERED WITH
THESE OCEANS...
YOU HAVE THE
ATLANTIC OCEAN,
PACIFIC OCEAN...
WE HAVE SURFACE CURRENTS
AND THEN THERE ARE
VERY DEEP CURRENTS...
THE OCEAN HAS PLAYED
A REALLY BIG ROLE
IN THE CLIMATE
OF THE EARTH...
THE OCEAN IS
TRULY AMAZING.
LAKES, RIVERS,
OCEANS AND SEAS;
THE EARTH IS COVERED
WITH 70% WATER
AND IS OFTEN CALLED
"THE WATER PLANET",
A VITAL ELEMENT
TO LIFE ON EARTH.
EARTH IS THE ONLY TERRESTRIAL
PLANET THAT WE KNOW OF
THAT HAS LIQUID WATER
IN GREAT ABUNDANCE.
AND IT'S A RESULT
OF THESE VAST OCEANS
THAT WE BELIEVE
MADE LIFE POSSIBLE.
WITHOUT WATER, AT LEAST,
MODERN BIOLOGISTS
DON'T BELIEVE THAT WE
WOULD EVEN BE HERE.
SO, OCEANS AND WATER ON
THIS PLANET EQUAL LIFE.
WHERE DID THE VAST AMOUNTS
OF WATER ON EARTH COME FROM?
SOME SCIENTISTS THINK IT
MAY BE FROM ICY COMETS
THAT DELIVERED
WATER TO EARTH.
BUT THE MOST ACCEPTED
THEORY IS THAT THE WATER
CAME FROM VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS
AS THE EARTH WAS COOLING.
OVER GEOLOGIC TIME, MOST
OF THE OCEANS THAT WE SEE
ARE THE RESULT OF
VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS.
SO, VOLCANOES PRODUCE
A VERY LARGE AMOUNT OF
WATER VAPOR, THEY'RE
DE-GASSING FROM THE CENTER
OF THE EARTH OR THE
INTERIOR OF THE EARTH.
THE OCEANS HAVE CHANGED
THROUGHOUT GEOLOGIC TIME
AS THE CONTINENTS HAVE
MOVED ABOUT THE PLANET.
BUT TODAY WE RECOGNIZE
FOUR MAJOR REGIONS:
THE ATLANTIC OCEAN
THE INDIAN OCEAN
THE ARCTIC OCEAN
AND THEN THERE IS THE
LARGEST GEOGRAPHIC
FEATURE ON THE
PLANET, COVERING OVER
HALF THE OCEAN
SURFACE AREA -
THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
HOWEVER, SOME SCIENTISTS
CONSIDER THE WATERS AROUND
ANTARCTICA TO BE A
SEPARATE FIFTH REGION,
CALLED THE
"SOUTHERN OCEAN".
AND WHILE THESE OCEANS
ARE DISTINCT IN SOME WAYS,
THEY ARE REALLY ONE GLOBAL
OCEAN AND CONNECTED TO
EACH OTHER AND WITH
OTHER BODIES OF WATER
THROUGH THE WATER CYCLE.
THE WATER ON EARTH IS
ESSENTIALLY CONSTANTLY
BEING RECYCLED.
YOU'VE GOT WATER
EVAPORATING FROM THE OCEANS
AND CURRENTLY A LOT FROM
THE DIFFERENT ICE CAPS.
YOU'VE GOT A LOT OF THE
WATER TURNING FROM ICE
TO WATER THAT GETS UP INTO
THE ATMOSPHERE WHERE IT'S
MOVED AROUND, IT FORMS
CLOUDS AND WE GET RAIN.
WHILE LAKES AND OTHER
FRESHWATER BASINS
CATCH SOME OF THE RAIN,
MOST OF THE WATER
FLOWS BACK TO THE
OCEANS AND SEAS,
ACCOUNTING FOR 97% OF THE
EARTH'S WATER - SALTWATER,
AND THESE VAST
BODIES OF WATER
CONTAIN RICH AND
VARIED RESOURCES.
THE OCEAN IS SO IMPORTANT
IN THAT IT PROVIDES FOOD,
IT CONTROLS CLIMATE,
ITS DEEPER THAN
OUR HIGHEST MOUNTAIN
IS HIGH AND
IT'S GOT SOME OF THE
TALLEST MOUNTAINS.
IT'S GOT INCREDIBLE
TOPOGRAPHY AND DIVERSITY,
AND WE REALLY
DON'T KNOW
A WHOLE LOT OF
WHAT'S DOWN THERE.
THERE'S SO MANY
THINGS TO DISCOVER.
OCEANOGRAPHY AND
THE MARINE SCIENCES
STRIVE TO KNOW MORE
ABOUT THE DEEP OCEANS.
AMONG OTHER THINGS, THEY
STUDY THE MANY RESOURCES
INCLUDING MARINE LIFE.
THEY LOOK AT WAVES,
CURRENTS AND TIDES;
THEY STUDY THE EFFECT
OCEANS HAVE ON CLIMATE;
AND THEY INVESTIGATE THE
GEOLOGY OF THE OCEAN FLOOR.
THE OCEAN FLOOR CAN
BE HIDDEN FROM VIEW,
BUT MODERN EXPLORATION
HAS REVEALED
A VERY INTERESTING
LANDSCAPE DEEP BELOW.
THE OCEAN FLOOR IS
LIKE THE SURFACE,
EXCEPT THAT IT'S
UNDER WATER.
MANY SCIENTISTS FOR A
LONG TIME THOUGHT THE
OCEAN BASINS WERE FLAT
FEATURELESS THINGS THAT
HAD MILLIONS OF YEARS
OF ACCUMULATED SEDIMENT
THAT WOULD RECORD,
VERY CONVENIENTLY,
EARTH'S EARLY BEGINNINGS
TO THE PRESENT DAY.
BUT WHAT WE FIND IS THAT
THE OCEAN BOTTOMS ARE
EXTREMELY VARIED IN THEIR
TOPOGRAPHY AND FEATURES
AND REVEAL ACTUALLY
THE SECRETS BEHIND
PLATE TECTONICS.
THE EARTH IS MADE UP OF
CONTINENTAL AND OCEANIC
CRUSTS AND THE OCEANIC
CRUST OCCURS IN THE OCEANS.
CONTINENTAL MARGINS ARE
WHERE CONTINENTAL CRUST
MEETS THE OCEAN FLOOR,
OR OCEANIC CRUST,
AND THEY ARE DIVIDED
INTO SUBSECTIONS:
THE CONTINENTAL SHELF
THE CONTINENTAL SLOPE
AND THE CONTINENTAL RISE.
WHEN WE LOOK AT
CONTINENTS WE OFTEN
SEE THE MAP EDGE
OF A CONTINENT.
THAT IS, THE EDGE OF THE
LAND WHERE THE WATER BEGINS.
BUT THAT'S NOT WHERE
THE CONTINENT STOPS.
IF WE LOOK AT THE EDGE OF
THE CONTINENT IT ACTUALLY
EXTENDS WELL BEYOND THE
SHORELINE INTO RELATIVELY
DEEP OCEAN - MAYBE A
COUPLE HUNDRED METERS -
SOMETHING CALLED THE
"CONTINENTAL SHELF".
THAT'S STILL
CONTINENTAL MATERIAL.
IT WILL THEN DROP OFF INTO
CONTINENTAL SLOPE -
A VERY STEEP
SECTION WHICH IS
REALLY SOMETHING THAT
MARKS THE TRANSITION
FROM CONTINENTAL CRUST
TO OCEANIC CRUST.
AND THEN WE HAVE
SOMETHING CALLED THE
"CONTINENTAL RISE"
WHICH IS TYPICALLY
A FAN OF SEDIMENT
THAT'S PRODUCED
AT THE BASE OF
THE CONTINENTAL SLOPE
AND THIS CONTINENTAL MARGIN
IS GREATLY INFLUENCED
BY THE PLATE TECTONIC
ACTIVITY THAT'S GOING ON.
THERE ARE TWO TYPES OF
CONTINENTAL MARGINS
BASED ON PLATE TECTONICS
INVOLVING THE INTERACTION
BETWEEN THE PLATES
OF OUR EARTH:
INACTIVE, OR PASSIVE,
AND ACTIVE MARGINS.
INACTIVE CONTINENTAL
MARGINS ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH DIVERGENT PLATE
BOUNDARIES WHERE
TWO PLATES ARE MOVING
AWAY FROM EACH OTHER,
ALLOWING MAGMA TO RISE
FROM DEEP IN THE EARTH
CREATING NEW CRUST,
AND THIS AFFECTS THE
SHAPE OF THE MARGIN.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE EAST
COAST OF NORTH AMERICA
ALONG FLORIDA
HAS A VERY BROAD,
GENTLY SLOPING
CONTINENTAL SHELF
AND A VERY DISTINCT
SLOPE AND RISE.
ACTIVE CONTINENTAL MARGINS
ARE WHERE PLATES COLLIDE
AND CRUST IS SUCKED
BACK INTO THE EARTH.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF WE'RE ON
WHAT'S CALLED AN ACTIVE
CONTINENTAL MARGIN,
THAT'S ONE THAT HAS
ACTIVE CONVERGENCE
AND SUBDUCTION,
WE'LL HAVE A VERY
SHORT AND ABBREVIATED
CONTINENTAL MARGIN WITH A
VERY DEEP OCEANIC TRENCH.
TRENCHES MARK AREAS
OF SUBDUCTION.
BEYOND THE CONTINENTAL
MARGINS YOU GET INTO THE
DEEP OCEANS AND A PLACE WE
CALL THE "ABYSSAL PLAIN".
THE ABYSSAL PLAIN IS A
VERY FLAT, IN SOME CASES
FEATURELESS ABYSS, IF YOU
WILL, OF THE OCEAN BOTTOM.
AS WE MOVE ACROSS
THE ABYSSAL PLAIN
WE EVENTUALLY RUN
INTO ONE OF THE MOST
MAGNIFICENT FEATURES
ON THE PLANET,
AND THAT IS THE
MID-OCEAN RIDGE SYSTEMS.
AND THIS MARKS REALLY THE
CENTER OF THE OCEAN BASIN.
MID-OCEAN RIDGES WHERE
TWO OCEANIC PLATES
ARE COMING APART HAVE
INCREDIBLE TOPOGRAPHY.
THEY'RE GENERALLY ABOUT
TWO KILOMETERS WIDE
AND THEY'RE ALSO ABOUT
TWO KILOMETERS HIGH.
THEY'RE LIKE
MOUNTAIN RANGES.
THESE PATTERNS OF THE
OCEAN FLOOR REPEAT
UNTIL WE MEET
THE NEXT COAST.
AND THERE ARE MANY
KINDS OF COASTS
AND THEY CHANGE
OVER TIME.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF REASONS
WHY COASTS LOOK THE WAY
THEY DO AS A FUNCTION
OF WHAT KINDS OF RIVERS
ARE DEPOSITING WHAT KINDS
OF MATERIAL ALONG THE COAST;
THE ORIENTATION
OF THE COASTLINE
RELATIVE TO
WAVE SYSTEMS;
WHETHER OR NOT THE COAST
IS TECTONICALLY ACTIVE
AND MOVING UP.
ALL OF THESE THINGS, OF
COURSE, ARE IMPORTANT
TO FACTOR IN WHEN YOU'RE
TRYING TO UNDERSTAND
A PARTICULAR COAST.
I WOULD SAY THE MAIN
CONTROLLING FACTOR
OF WHAT A COASTLINE
WILL END UP LOOKING LIKE
IS THE ROCKS AROUND
IT, YOU KNOW?
BECAUSE THAT'S WHERE
THE INPUT OF SEDIMENT
IS COMING FROM.
SO, A LOT OF SANDY
BEACHES, YOU KNOW,
YOU HAVE A LOT
OF ROCK NEARBY
THAT'S PRETTY EASY TO
BREAK DOWN AND TO ERODE
AND JUST DUMP
IN THE OCEAN.
PLACES WHERE YOU HAVE
REALLY ROCKY BEACHES
ARE WHERE THE ROCK IS A
LITTLE HARDER TO BREAK DOWN.
AND, OF COURSE, WHERE
THERE'S CLIFFS, YOU KNOW,
THAT ROCK'S JUST NOT
GOING ANYWHERE, RIGHT?
SO YOU'RE NOT GOING TO HAVE
A LOT OF SAND IN THOSE AREAS.
THE COASTS, THE BASINS,
PLATE TECTONICS,
ALL AFFECT THE
IMPORTANT WAVES, TIDES,
AND CURRENTS OF
OUR DYNAMIC OCEANS.
ONE OF THE WAYS WE SEE
THE POWER OF THE OCEAN
IS IN WAVES.
WE SEE WAVES CRASHING ON THE
BEACH AND THE QUESTION IS...
AND THESE WAVES
DON'T GO AWAY,
THEY'RE CONSTANTLY
HAPPENING.
WELL, AS WIND BLOWS ACROSS
THE SURFACE OF THE WATER,
THE SPEED OF THE WIND,
THE DURATION THAT
THE WIND BLOWS,
AND THE DISTANCE
OVER WHICH THE WIND
BLOWS OVER THE WATER
HAS A GREAT INFLUENCE
ON HOW THAT WATER MOVES.
IT'LL CREATE SWELLS WITHIN
THE WATER AND THOSE SWELLS
REPRESENT ENERGY
THAT'S BEING IMPARTED
TO THE WATER
FROM THE WIND.
THE WAVE DOES NOT
MOVE WATER FORWARD;
RATHER, IT MOVES THE
ENERGY AS IT PROGRESSES.
THE EASIEST WAY TO
THINK OF THAT IS
IF YOU'VE EVER SEEN A
FIELD OF GRAIN OR WHEAT
THAT'S BLOWING
IN THE WIND.
YOU SEE WHAT APPEAR TO
BE WAVES MOVING THROUGH
THAT WHEAT FIELD.
THE PLANTS DON'T MOVE, BUT
THE WIND'S IMPARTING ENERGY
TO THOSE PLANTS AND THEN
MOVING BACK AND FORTH.
WELL, WIND BLOWING ON THE
SURFACE OF THE OCEAN
OR THE SURFACE OF A WATER
BODY DOES THE SAME THING -
IT IMPARTS ENERGY TO THAT
WATER BUT DOESN'T REALLY
MOVE THE WATER
FORWARD ANY.
THE ENERGY MOVES
THOUGH THE WATER.
THE SURFACE, IN
FACT, DOESN'T MOVE.
RATHER, IT RISES UP AND
GRAVITY PULLS THE WAVE
BACK DOWN INTO
THE OCEAN.
WAVES ARE GENERATED AS A
RESULT IN THE AREA WHERE
WIND AND WATER INTERACT
AND, BECAUSE THE SURFACE
DOESN'T MOVE, IT RISES UNTIL
IT COLLAPSES ON A SHORE.
WELL, AS THAT ENERGY
APPROACHES SHALLOWER
AND SHALLOWER WATER,
THAT WATER BEGINS TO
PILE UP ON ITSELF.
THERE'S SOMETHING CALLED
"FEELING BOTTOM"
AND THAT IS
WHEN THE MOTION,
THE ENERGY THAT'S
MAKING THE WATER MOVE
ACTUALLY BEGINS TO FEEL THE
BOTTOM OF THE SHORELINE.
AND WHAT HAPPENS THEN
IS THAT THE BOTTOM WATER
BEGINS TO SLOW DOWN, BUT
THE TOP WATER STILL HAS
A LOT OF ENERGY MOVING
AT THE SAME SPEED.
THAT WATER WILL PILE UP,
FORMING A WAVE WHICH WILL
EVENTUALLY BECOME UNSTABLE
AND COLLAPSE OR BREAK.
THERE ARE OTHER
CAUSES OF WAVES,
BUT ONE OF THE MOST
DEVASTATING CAN BE
UNDERWATER EARTHQUAKES
WHICH CAN CAUSE TSUNAMIS.
A TSUNAMI IS GENERATED
WHEN YOU HAVE AN EARTHQUAKE
ALONG A PLATE BOUNDARY
THAT IS UNDERWATER.
SO, IN THE CASE OF THE
BIG TSUNAMI GENERATED BY
THE SUMATRAN EARTHQUAKE,
WHAT HAPPENED WAS
THAT WAS ASSOCIATED WITH A
CONVERGENT PLATE BOUNDARY
WHERE ONE PLATE
IS GRINDING DOWN
UNDERNEATH
ANOTHER ONE.
AND WHEN THAT
EARTHQUAKE OCCURRED,
THE UPPERMOST PLATE
MOVED VERY QUICKLY UP.
AND, SO, ALL OF A SUDDEN
YOU'RE PUSHING ROCK
UP INTO AN AREA THAT
WAS OCCUPIED BY WATER
AND YOU CREATE
A GIANT WAVE.
AND, SO, AS YOU MOVE ALL
THAT VOLUME OF WATER,
IT'S JUST LIKE SLAPPING
YOUR HAND AGAINST
THE SIDE OF A BATHTUB.
THE WATER HAS TO GO
SOMEWHERE AND IT
GENERATES WAVES THAT
SLOSH BACK AND FORTH
ACROSS THE OCEAN BASIN.
THE HIGHEST PART OF THE
WAVE IS CALLED THE CREST.
THE LOWEST PART OF THE
WAVE IS CALLED THE TROUGH.
WAVES CAN BE DESCRIBED
BY THEIR HEIGHT, LENGTH,
AND WAVE PERIOD.
THE WAVE HEIGHT IS
THE VERTICAL DISTANCE
FROM THE CREST
TO THE TROUGH.
THE WAVE LENGTH IS THE
HORIZONTAL DISTANCE
BETWEEN THE
CREST OF ONE WAVE
AND THE CREST OF THE
SUCCESSIVE WAVE.
THE WAVE PERIOD IS
THE TIME IT TAKES
FOR TWO SUCCESSIVE WAVES
TO PASS A FIXED POINT.
AND THE WAVE VELOCITY IS THE
SPEED THE WAVES ARE MOVING.
TIDES ARE A RESULT OF
THE GRAVITATIONAL PULL
OF THE MOON
AND THE SUN.
BUT BECAUSE THE SUN IS ABOUT
400 TIMES FURTHER AWAY,
THE MOON IS THE
DOMINANT INFLUENCE.
SO, THE TIDES ARE CAUSED
BASICALLY BY THE INFLUENCE
OF THE MOON AND ITS
GRAVITATIONAL PULL.
AT TIMES WHEN THE MOON
IS A LITTLE BIT CLOSER
TO THE EARTH, THE GRAVITY'S
A LITTLE STRONGER,
THE MOON LITERALLY
SUCKS THE WATER
TO ONE DIRECTION
OF THE EARTH.
WHEN THE SUN AND THE
MOON ARE ALIGNED,
THEIR COMBINED FORCES
PRODUCE LARGER TIDAL BULGES
CALLED "SPRING TIDES".
HOWEVER, THEY ARE NOT
RELATED TO THE SEASONS.
THEY ACTUALLY OCCUR
TWICE A MONTH,
DURING THE FULL
AND NEW MOONS.
"NEAP TIDES" ALSO
OCCUR TWICE A MONTH
DURING QUARTER MOONS
WHEN THE MOON AND SUN
ARE PERPENDICULAR
TO EACH OTHER
IN RESPECT TO
THE EARTH.
NEAP TIDES ARE
ESPECIALLY WEAK TIDES.
TIDAL PATTERNS HAPPEN
ON A DAILY BASIS
AND THERE ARE
THREE MAIN TYPES:
DIURNAL TIDES ARE
WHEN THERE IS
ONE "HIGH" TIDE AND ONE
"LOW" TIDE EVERY DAY.
SEMI-DIURNAL TIDES
ARE WHEN THERE ARE
TWO HIGH AND TWO
LOW TIDES PER DAY.
MIXED TIDES INVOLVE
TWO HIGH WATER
AND TWO LOW WATER
TIDES PER DAY;
HOWEVER, THE TWO HIGH
TIDES AS WELL AS
THE TWO LOW TIDES ARE
OF UNEQUAL HEIGHT.
WHILE WAVES AND
TIDES MIX THE WATER,
CURRENTS ARE THE WAY
OCEAN WATERS MOVE.
THE OCEAN IS DYNAMIC;
IT'S MOVING AT ALL LEVELS.
WE HAVE SURFACE CURRENTS
AND THEN THERE ARE
VERY DEEP CURRENTS.
CURRENTS ARE DRIVEN BY
SUCH FACTORS AS HEATING
AND COOLING OF THE WATERS,
THE AMOUNT OF SALT,
AND WIND, WHICH ARE EFFECTS
OF THE EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE.
THE CURRENTS OF THE OCEANS
ARE DIRECTLY DRIVEN
BY THE MOTIONS OF THE
EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE.
AND THE MOTIONS IN THE
EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE ARE
DIRECTLY TIED TO THE
SUN AND HOW THE SUN
DIFFERENTIALLY HEATS
THE ATMOSPHERE.
THE SUN WILL HEAT THE
SURFACE MORE AND THEN
IT STARTS PENETRATING
THE DEEP OCEANS WHICH ARE
VERY COLD COMPARED TO
THE SURFACE OF THE OCEAN.
THE OCEAN IS LAYERED,
WARMER ON TOP;
COLDER AND MORE
DENSE WATER IS BELOW.
ON THE SURFACE, CURRENTS ARE
DRIVEN MAINLY BY THE WIND
BUT OTHER FORCES SUCH AS
THE ROTATION OF THE EARTH
AND LAND MASSES ALSO
AFFECT THE PATTERNS.
YOUR SURFACE CURRENT IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE ATLANTIC
WILL BE MORE OR LESS FROM
WEST TOWARDS THE EAST,
EXCEPT THAT YOU WILL
ENCOUNTER EUROPE
SO THERE WILL HAVE TO
BE A RETURN CURRENT.
YOU HAVE CIRCULATING GYRES
IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC
AND THE SOUTH ATLANTIC
AND THE NORTH PACIFIC
AND THE SOUTH PACIFIC.
BECAUSE OF THE
EARTH'S ROTATION,
HUGE CIRCULAR
SURFACE GYRES
ROTATE CLOCKWISE IN
THE NORTHERN HEMISPHERE
AND COUNTER-CLOCKWISE IN
THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.
BELOW THE SURFACE THERE
ARE OTHER KINDS OF CURRENTS
- DEEP OCEAN CURRENTS
WHICH AFFECT ABOUT
80% TO 90%
OF THE OCEAN.
MOST OF THE CURRENTS ARE
THESE DEEP OCEAN CURRENTS
AND THEY FORM BY
DIFFERENCES IN SALINITY
AND TEMPERATURE.
THESE DIFFERENCES IN
SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE
AS WELL AS WATER PRESSURE
DETERMINE THE DENSITY
OF OCEAN WATER.
THESE DENSER COLDER WATERS
- THE DEEP OCEAN CURRENTS -
GENERALLY TRAVEL AT
A MUCH SLOWER SPEED
WHEN COMPARED
TO SURFACE FLOWS.
AND ALL THESE CURRENTS
INFLUENCE WEATHER PATTERNS
AND CYCLES, BOTH LOCALLY
AND AROUND THE WORLD.
ONE EXAMPLE IS EL NINO.
EL NINO REFERS TO A PERIOD OF
TIME WHEN OCEAN TEMPERATURES
ALONG THE EQUATOR IN
THE EASTERN PACIFIC
BECOME WARMER THAN
THEY NORMALLY ARE.
THAT HAPPENS RIGHT ALONG THE
COAST OF SOUTH AMERICA AND
FISHERMEN HAVE KNOWN ABOUT
THIS THERE FOR MANY YEARS.
EL NINO IS ACTUALLY REALLY
GOOD FOR FISHERMEN
IN SOUTH AMERICA BECAUSE
WHERE THERE'S WARM WATER
THERE'S A LOT OF
NUTRIENTS AND THAT MEANS
THAT THERE'S A
LOT MORE FISH.
SO EL NINO'S GOOD FOR
FISHERMEN IN SOUTH AMERICA
BECAUSE IT PROVIDES THEM
WITH A LARGER CATCH OF FISH.
IT'S NOT SO GOOD FOR
PLACES LIKE CALIFORNIA
AND OTHER PLACES ON THE
WEST COAST OF AMERICA
BECAUSE IT TENDS TO
CAUSE A LOT OF STORMS.
BUT WE NOW RECOGNIZE
THAT THAT COASTAL WARMING
AFFECTS WHERE STORMS TRAVEL
ALL AROUND THE WORLD.
THE WARM TEMPERATURES
OF EL NINO ARE PART OF A
LARGER CYCLE, PAIRED WITH
A COOLING OF THE WATERS
CALLED "LA NINA".
IT'S THE COLD PHASE THAT
WE NOW CALL "LA NINA"
WHICH IS A RECENT
CONSTRUCTION.
IT JUST MEANS THE
OPPOSITE OF EL NINO.
AND IT, INDEED, HAS MANY
OF THE OPPOSITE CLIMATIC
EFFECTS IN FAR-FLUNG
PLACES THAT EL NINO HAS.
LIKE EL NINO, LA NINA ONLY
HAPPENS EVERY FEW YEARS
AND ONLY LASTS A FEW
MONTHS, BUT IT CAN HAVE
LONG-REACHING EFFECTS ON
THE CLIMATES OF THE EARTH,
EFFECTS WHICH
ULTIMATELY SHED LIGHT
ON THE IMPORTANT
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
OCEAN TEMPERATURES
AND CLIMATE.
THE OCEANS ARE VAST AND
DEEP, AND FILLED WITH
RICHES AND MYSTERY.
BUT DESPITE THEIR HUGE
SIZE, THE OCEANS HAVE BEEN
GREATLY AFFECTED
BY HUMAN ACTIVITY.
POLLUTION, OVER FISHING,
AND RISING TEMPERATURES
LINKED TO INCREASED CO2
EMISSIONS ARE SOME OF
THE MAJOR CONCERNS.
AS THE EARTH GETS WARMER,
MUCH OF THE POLAR ICE
IS MELTING, CHANGING
THE TEMPERATURE
AND LEVEL OF THE OCEAN,
DISRUPTING CIRCULATION
AND, ULTIMATELY, ALTERING
THE GLOBAL CLIMATE.
IF YOU WANT TO STUDY
CLIMATE, YOU NEED TO KNOW
A LOT ABOUT
THE OCEANS.
IF YOU WANT TO STUDY MANY
ISSUES IN BIOLOGY, ECOLOGY,
AND CHEMISTRY, YOU NEED TO
KNOW A LOT ABOUT THE OCEANS.
EVEN IF YOU WANT TO DO
PROBLEMS WITH URBAN PLANNING
- LOTS OF URBAN CITIES
ARE PLACED AROUND
OCEANS AND COASTS.
IT'S A DISCIPLINE
THAT IS EXPANDING.
OCEANOGRAPHY
INVOLVES MANY FIELDS
AND HAS MADE
MANY DISCOVERIES.
HOWEVER, THERE IS
MUCH MORE TO LEARN.
IRONICALLY, I BELIEVE WE
PROBABLY KNOW MORE ABOUT
THE MOON AND ABOUT OUR OWN
SOLAR SYSTEM THAN WE DO
ABOUT OUR OWN OCEANS AND
WHAT RESIDES AT THE BOTTOM
OF THE OCEANS.
OCEANOGRAPHY IS
LEARNING MORE EVERY DAY
BUT THERE'S STILL VAST
REGIONS OF OUR PLANET,
NAMELY OUR DEEP OCEANS,
THAT WE KNOW VIRTUALLY
NOTHING ABOUT.
BY EXPLORING THESE
REGIONS OF THE DEEP
WE MAY BETTER UNDERSTAND
THE COMPLEXITY OF THE OCEANS
AS WELL AS THE IMPORTANT
INTERDEPENDENCIES
BETWEEN LIFE,
THE OCEANS,
AND THE ATMOSPHERE
OF OUR PLANET EARTH.
*